README.md, before:

# Forked from https://github.com/Zizaco/entrust.

# ENTRUST (Lumen 5 Package)

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/proshore/entrust-lumen.svg?branch=dev-entrust-lumen)](https://travis-ci.org/proshore/entrust-lumen)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/Proshore/entrust-lumen.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/proshore/entrust-lumen)
[![License](https://poser.pugx.org/proshore/entrust-lumen/license)](https://packagist.org/packages/proshore/entrust-lumen)
[![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/proshore/entrust-lumen/downloads)](https://packagist.org/packages/proshore/entrust-lumen)


Entrust-Lumen is a Fork project modified to run with Lumen. It is a succinct and flexible way to add Role-based Permissions to **Lumen 5**.

## Contents

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
    - [User relation to roles](#user-relation-to-roles)
    - [Models](#models)
        - [Role](#role)
        - [Permission](#permission)
        - [User](#user)
        - [Soft Deleting](#soft-deleting)
- [Usage](#usage)
    - [Concepts](#concepts)
        - [Checking for Roles & Permissions](#checking-for-roles--permissions)
        - [User ability](#user-ability)
    - [Blade templates](#blade-templates)
    - [Middleware](#middleware)
    - [Short syntax route filter](#short-syntax-route-filter)
    - [Route filter](#route-filter)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [License](#license)
- [Contribution guidelines](#contribution-guidelines)
- [Additional information](#additional-information)

## Installation

1) In order to install Lumen 5 Entrust, just add the following to your composer.json. Then run `composer update`:

```json
"proshore/entrust-lumen":"1.0.2"
```

to your composer.json. Then run `composer install` or `composer update`.

Then in your `bootstrap/app.php` add
```php
    // Register Service providers for Entrust
    $app->register(Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustServiceProvider::class);
```
in the same file find the line with
```php
$app->withFacades();
``` 
 and add the facades as
```php
    $app->withFacades(true,
         [
             Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustFacade::class => 'Entrust',
         ]);
```
.

If you are going to use [Middleware](#middleware) (requires Lumen 5.1 or later) you also need to add
```php
    'role' => \Zizaco\Entrust\Middleware\EntrustRole::class,
    'permission' => \Zizaco\Entrust\Middleware\EntrustPermission::class,
    'ability' => \Zizaco\Entrust\Middleware\EntrustAbility::class,
```
to `$app->routeMiddleware` methods array in `bootstrap/app.php`.

## Configuration

Set the property values in the `config/auth.php`.
These values will be used by entrust to refer to the correct user table and model.

You can also publish the configuration for this package to further customize table names and model namespaces.  
Just use `php artisan vendor:publish` and a `entrust.php` file will be created in your app/config directory.

Note: You may need to install [lumen-vendor-publish](https://github.com/laravelista/lumen-vendor-publish) to publish the `entrust.php` file.

### User relation to roles

Now generate the Entrust migration:

```bash
php artisan entrust:migration
```

It will generate the `<timestamp>_entrust_setup_tables.php` migration.
You may now run it with the artisan migrate command:

```bash
php artisan migrate
```

After the migration, four new tables will be present:
- `roles` &mdash; stores role records
- `permissions` &mdash; stores permission records
- `role_user` &mdash; stores [many-to-many](http://laravel.com/docs/4.2/eloquent#many-to-many) relations between roles and users
- `permission_role` &mdash; stores [many-to-many](http://laravel.com/docs/4.2/eloquent#many-to-many) relations between roles and permissions

### Models

#### Role

Create a Role model inside `app/models/Role.php` using the following example:

```php
<?php namespace App;

use Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustRole;

class Role extends EntrustRole
{
}
```

The `Role` model has three main attributes:
- `name` &mdash; Unique name for the Role, used for looking up role information in the application layer. For example: "admin", "owner", "employee".
- `display_name` &mdash; Human readable name for the Role. Not necessarily unique and optional. For example: "User Administrator", "Project Owner", "Widget  Co. Employee".
- `description` &mdash; A more detailed explanation of what the Role does. Also optional.

Both `display_name` and `description` are optional; their fields are nullable in the database.

#### Permission

Create a Permission model inside `app/models/Permission.php` using the following example:

```php
<?php namespace App;

use Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustPermission;

class Permission extends EntrustPermission
{
}
```

The `Permission` model has the same three attributes as the `Role`:
- `name` &mdash; Unique name for the permission, used for looking up permission information in the application layer. For example: "create-post", "edit-user", "post-payment", "mailing-list-subscribe".
- `display_name` &mdash; Human readable name for the permission. Not necessarily unique and optional. For example "Create Posts", "Edit Users", "Post Payments", "Subscribe to mailing list".
- `description` &mdash; A more detailed explanation of the Permission.

In general, it may be helpful to think of the last two attributes in the form of a sentence: "The permission `display_name` allows a user to `description`."

#### User

Next, use the `EntrustUserTrait` trait in your existing `User` model. For example:

```php
<?php

use Zizaco\Entrust\Traits\EntrustUserTrait;

class User extends Eloquent
{
    use EntrustUserTrait; // add this trait to your user model

    ...
}
```

This will enable the relation with `Role` and add the following methods `roles()`, `hasRole($name)`, `can($permission)`, and `ability($roles, $permissions, $options)` within your `User` model.

Don't forget to dump composer autoload

```bash
composer dump-autoload
```

**And you are ready to go.**

#### Soft Deleting

The default migration takes advantage of `onDelete('cascade')` clauses within the pivot tables to remove relations when a parent record is deleted. If for some reason you cannot use cascading deletes in your database, the EntrustRole and EntrustPermission classes, and the HasRole trait include event listeners to manually delete records in relevant pivot tables. In the interest of not accidentally deleting data, the event listeners will **not** delete pivot data if the model uses soft deleting. However, due to limitations in Laravel's event listeners, there is no way to distinguish between a call to `delete()` versus a call to `forceDelete()`. For this reason, **before you force delete a model, you must manually delete any of the relationship data** (unless your pivot tables uses cascading deletes). For example:

```php
$role = Role::findOrFail(1); // Pull back a given role

// Regular Delete
$role->delete(); // This will work no matter what

// Force Delete
$role->users()->sync([]); // Delete relationship data
$role->perms()->sync([]); // Delete relationship data

$role->forceDelete(); // Now force delete will work regardless of whether the pivot table has cascading delete
```

## Usage

### Concepts
Let's start by creating the following `Role`s and `Permission`s:

```php
$owner = new Role();
$owner->name         = 'owner';
$owner->display_name = 'Project Owner'; // optional
$owner->description  = 'User is the owner of a given project'; // optional
$owner->save();

$admin = new Role();
$admin->name         = 'admin';
$admin->display_name = 'User Administrator'; // optional
$admin->description  = 'User is allowed to manage and edit other users'; // optional
$admin->save();
```

Next, with both roles created let's assign them to the users.
Thanks to the `HasRole` trait this is as easy as:

```php
$user = User::where('username', '=', 'michele')->first();

// role attach alias
$user->attachRole($admin); // parameter can be an Role object, array, or id

// or eloquent's original technique
$user->roles()->attach($admin->id); // id only
```

Now we just need to add permissions to those Roles:

```php
$createPost = new Permission();
$createPost->name         = 'create-post';
$createPost->display_name = 'Create Posts'; // optional
// Allow a user to...
$createPost->description  = 'create new blog posts'; // optional
$createPost->save();

$editUser = new Permission();
$editUser->name         = 'edit-user';
$editUser->display_name = 'Edit Users'; // optional
// Allow a user to...
$editUser->description  = 'edit existing users'; // optional
$editUser->save();

$admin->attachPermission($createPost);
// equivalent to $admin->perms()->sync(array($createPost->id));

$owner->attachPermissions(array($createPost, $editUser));
// equivalent to $owner->perms()->sync(array($createPost->id, $editUser->id));
```

#### Checking for Roles & Permissions

Now we can check for roles and permissions simply by doing:

```php
$user->hasRole('owner');   // false
$user->hasRole('admin');   // true
$user->can('edit-user');   // false
$user->can('create-post'); // true
```

Both `hasRole()` and `can()` can receive an array of roles & permissions to check:

```php
$user->hasRole(['owner', 'admin']);       // true
$user->can(['edit-user', 'create-post']); // true
```

By default, if any of the roles or permissions are present for a user then the method will return true.
Passing `true` as a second parameter instructs the method to require **all** of the items:

```php
$user->hasRole(['owner', 'admin']);             // true
$user->hasRole(['owner', 'admin'], true);       // false, user does not have admin role
$user->can(['edit-user', 'create-post']);       // true
$user->can(['edit-user', 'create-post'], true); // false, user does not have edit-user permission
```

You can have as many `Role`s as you want for each `User` and vice versa.

The `Entrust` class has shortcuts to both `can()` and `hasRole()` for the currently logged in user:

```php
Entrust::hasRole('role-name');
Entrust::can('permission-name');

// is identical to

Auth::user()->hasRole('role-name');
Auth::user()->can('permission-name);
```

You can also use placeholders (wildcards) to check any matching permission by doing:

```php
// match any admin permission
$user->can("admin.*"); // true

// match any permission about users
$user->can("*_users"); // true
```


#### User ability

More advanced checking can be done using the awesome `ability` function.
It takes in three parameters (roles, permissions, options):
- `roles` is a set of roles to check.
- `permissions` is a set of permissions to check.

Either of the roles or permissions variable can be a comma separated string or array:

```php
$user->ability(array('admin', 'owner'), array('create-post', 'edit-user'));

// or

$user->ability('admin,owner', 'create-post,edit-user');
```

This will check whether the user has any of the provided roles and permissions.
In this case it will return true since the user is an `admin` and has the `create-post` permission.

The third parameter is an options array:

```php
$options = array(
    'validate_all' => true | false (Default: false),
    'return_type'  => boolean | array | both (Default: boolean)
);
```

- `validate_all` is a boolean flag to set whether to check all the values for true, or to return true if at least one role or permission is matched.
- `return_type` specifies whether to return a boolean, array of checked values, or both in an array.

Here is an example output:

```php
$options = array(
    'validate_all' => true,
    'return_type' => 'both'
);

list($validate, $allValidations) = $user->ability(
    array('admin', 'owner'),
    array('create-post', 'edit-user'),
    $options
);

var_dump($validate);
// bool(false)

var_dump($allValidations);
// array(4) {
//     ['role'] => bool(true)
//     ['role_2'] => bool(false)
//     ['create-post'] => bool(true)
//     ['edit-user'] => bool(false)
// }

```
The `Entrust` class has a shortcut to `ability()` for the currently logged in user:

```php
Entrust::ability('admin,owner', 'create-post,edit-user');

// is identical to

Auth::user()->ability('admin,owner', 'create-post,edit-user');
```

### Middleware

You can use a middleware to filter routes and route groups by permission or role
```php
Route::group(['prefix' => 'admin', 'middleware' => ['role:admin']], function() {
    Route::get('/', 'AdminController@welcome');
    Route::get('/manage', ['middleware' => ['permission:manage-admins'], 'uses' => 'AdminController@manageAdmins']);
});
```

It is possible to use pipe symbol as *OR* operator:
```php
'middleware' => ['role:admin|root']
```

To emulate *AND* functionality just use multiple instances of middleware
```php
'middleware' => ['permission:owner', 'permission:writer']
```

For more complex situations use `ability` middleware which accepts 3 parameters: roles, permissions, validate_all
```php
'middleware' => ['ability:admin|owner,create-post|edit-user,true']
```

### Short syntax route filter

To filter a route by permission or role you can call the following in your `app/Http/routes.php`:

```php
// only users with roles that have the 'manage_posts' permission will be able to access any route within admin/post
Entrust::routeNeedsPermission('admin/post*', 'create-post');

// only owners will have access to routes within admin/advanced
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', 'owner');

// optionally the second parameter can be an array of permissions or roles
// user would need to match all roles or permissions for that route
Entrust::routeNeedsPermission('admin/post*', array('create-post', 'edit-comment'));
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', array('owner','writer'));
```

Both of these methods accept a third parameter.
If the third parameter is null then the return of a prohibited access will be `App::abort(403)`, otherwise the third parameter will be returned.
So you can use it like:

```php
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', 'owner', Redirect::to('/home'));
```

Furthermore both of these methods accept a fourth parameter.
It defaults to true and checks all roles/permissions given.
If you set it to false, the function will only fail if all roles/permissions fail for that user.
Useful for admin applications where you want to allow access for multiple groups.

```php
// if a user has 'create-post', 'edit-comment', or both they will have access
Entrust::routeNeedsPermission('admin/post*', array('create-post', 'edit-comment'), null, false);

// if a user is a member of 'owner', 'writer', or both they will have access
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', array('owner','writer'), null, false);

// if a user is a member of 'owner', 'writer', or both, or user has 'create-post', 'edit-comment' they will have access
// if the 4th parameter is true then the user must be a member of Role and must have Permission
Entrust::routeNeedsRoleOrPermission(
    'admin/advanced*',
    array('owner', 'writer'),
    array('create-post', 'edit-comment'),
    null,
    false
);
```

### Route filter

Entrust roles/permissions can be used in filters by simply using the `can` and `hasRole` methods from within the Facade:

```php
Route::filter('manage_posts', function()
{
    // check the current user
    if (!Entrust::can('create-post')) {
        return Redirect::to('admin');
    }
});

// only users with roles that have the 'manage_posts' permission will be able to access any admin/post route
Route::when('admin/post*', 'manage_posts');
```

Using a filter to check for a role:

```php
Route::filter('owner_role', function()
{
    // check the current user
    if (!Entrust::hasRole('Owner')) {
        App::abort(403);
    }
});

// only owners will have access to routes within admin/advanced
Route::when('admin/advanced*', 'owner_role');
```

As you can see `Entrust::hasRole()` and `Entrust::can()` checks if the user is logged in, and then if he or she has the role or permission.
If the user is not logged the return will also be `false`.

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter an error when doing the migration that looks like:

```
SQLSTATE[HY000]: General error: 1005 Can't create table 'laravelbootstrapstarter.#sql-42c_f8' (errno: 150)
    (SQL: alter table `role_user` add constraint role_user_user_id_foreign foreign key (`user_id`)
    references `users` (`id`)) (Bindings: array ())
```

Then it's likely that the `id` column in your user table does not match the `user_id` column in `role_user`.
Make sure both are `INT(10)`.

When trying to use the EntrustUserTrait methods, you encounter the error which looks like

    Class name must be a valid object or a string

then probably you don't have published Entrust assets or something went wrong when you did it.
First of all check that you have the `entrust.php` file in your `app/config` directory.
If you don't, then try `php artisan vendor:publish` and, if it does not appear, manually copy the `/vendor/zizaco/entrust/src/config/config.php` file in your config directory and rename it `entrust.php`.

## License

Entrust is free software distributed under the terms of the MIT license.

## Contribution guidelines

Support follows PSR-1 and PSR-4 PHP coding standards, and semantic versioning.

Please report any issue you find in the issues page.  
Pull requests are welcome.

Commit message:

To integrate custom entrust configurations
For Lumen, it is necessary to have the app load the config from config files within the config folder by the line added.

README.md, after:

# Forked from https://github.com/Zizaco/entrust.

# ENTRUST (Lumen 5 Package)

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/proshore/entrust-lumen.svg?branch=dev-entrust-lumen)](https://travis-ci.org/proshore/entrust-lumen)
[![Version](https://img.shields.io/packagist/v/Proshore/entrust-lumen.svg)](https://packagist.org/packages/proshore/entrust-lumen)
[![License](https://poser.pugx.org/proshore/entrust-lumen/license)](https://packagist.org/packages/proshore/entrust-lumen)
[![Total Downloads](https://poser.pugx.org/proshore/entrust-lumen/downloads)](https://packagist.org/packages/proshore/entrust-lumen)


Entrust-Lumen is a Fork project modified to run with Lumen. It is a succinct and flexible way to add Role-based Permissions to **Lumen 5**.

## Contents

- [Installation](#installation)
- [Configuration](#configuration)
    - [User relation to roles](#user-relation-to-roles)
    - [Models](#models)
        - [Role](#role)
        - [Permission](#permission)
        - [User](#user)
        - [Soft Deleting](#soft-deleting)
- [Usage](#usage)
    - [Concepts](#concepts)
        - [Checking for Roles & Permissions](#checking-for-roles--permissions)
        - [User ability](#user-ability)
    - [Blade templates](#blade-templates)
    - [Middleware](#middleware)
    - [Short syntax route filter](#short-syntax-route-filter)
    - [Route filter](#route-filter)
- [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)
- [License](#license)
- [Contribution guidelines](#contribution-guidelines)
- [Additional information](#additional-information)

## Installation

1) In order to install Lumen 5 Entrust, just add the following to your composer.json. Then run `composer update`:

```json
"proshore/entrust-lumen":"1.0.2"
```

to your composer.json. Then run `composer install` or `composer update`.

Then in your `bootstrap/app.php` add
```php
    // Register Service providers for Entrust
    $app->register(Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustServiceProvider::class);
```
in the same file find the line with
```php
$app->withFacades();
``` 
 and add the facades as
```php
    $app->withFacades(true,
         [
             Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustFacade::class => 'Entrust',
         ]);
```
.

If you are going to use [Middleware](#middleware) (requires Lumen 5.1 or later) you also need to add
```php
    'role' => \Zizaco\Entrust\Middleware\EntrustRole::class,
    'permission' => \Zizaco\Entrust\Middleware\EntrustPermission::class,
    'ability' => \Zizaco\Entrust\Middleware\EntrustAbility::class,
```
to `$app->routeMiddleware` methods array in `bootstrap/app.php`.

## Configuration

Set the property values in the `config/auth.php`.
These values will be used by entrust to refer to the correct user table and model.

You can also publish the configuration for this package to further customize table names and model namespaces.  
Just use `php artisan vendor:publish` and a `entrust.php` file will be created in your app/config directory.

Note: You may need to install [lumen-vendor-publish](https://github.com/laravelista/lumen-vendor-publish) to publish the `entrust.php` file.

So that your custom configurations be integrated in your app, insert this line in your bootstrap/app.php
```php
    $app->configure('permission');
```

### User relation to roles

Now generate the Entrust migration:

```bash
php artisan entrust:migration
```

It will generate the `<timestamp>_entrust_setup_tables.php` migration.
You may now run it with the artisan migrate command:

```bash
php artisan migrate
```

After the migration, four new tables will be present:
- `roles` &mdash; stores role records
- `permissions` &mdash; stores permission records
- `role_user` &mdash; stores [many-to-many](http://laravel.com/docs/4.2/eloquent#many-to-many) relations between roles and users
- `permission_role` &mdash; stores [many-to-many](http://laravel.com/docs/4.2/eloquent#many-to-many) relations between roles and permissions

### Models

#### Role

Create a Role model inside `app/models/Role.php` using the following example:

```php
<?php namespace App;

use Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustRole;

class Role extends EntrustRole
{
}
```

The `Role` model has three main attributes:
- `name` &mdash; Unique name for the Role, used for looking up role information in the application layer. For example: "admin", "owner", "employee".
- `display_name` &mdash; Human readable name for the Role. Not necessarily unique and optional. For example: "User Administrator", "Project Owner", "Widget  Co. Employee".
- `description` &mdash; A more detailed explanation of what the Role does. Also optional.

Both `display_name` and `description` are optional; their fields are nullable in the database.

#### Permission

Create a Permission model inside `app/models/Permission.php` using the following example:

```php
<?php namespace App;

use Zizaco\Entrust\EntrustPermission;

class Permission extends EntrustPermission
{
}
```

The `Permission` model has the same three attributes as the `Role`:
- `name` &mdash; Unique name for the permission, used for looking up permission information in the application layer. For example: "create-post", "edit-user", "post-payment", "mailing-list-subscribe".
- `display_name` &mdash; Human readable name for the permission. Not necessarily unique and optional. For example "Create Posts", "Edit Users", "Post Payments", "Subscribe to mailing list".
- `description` &mdash; A more detailed explanation of the Permission.

In general, it may be helpful to think of the last two attributes in the form of a sentence: "The permission `display_name` allows a user to `description`."

#### User

Next, use the `EntrustUserTrait` trait in your existing `User` model. For example:

```php
<?php

use Zizaco\Entrust\Traits\EntrustUserTrait;

class User extends Eloquent
{
    use EntrustUserTrait; // add this trait to your user model

    ...
}
```

This will enable the relation with `Role` and add the following methods `roles()`, `hasRole($name)`, `can($permission)`, and `ability($roles, $permissions, $options)` within your `User` model.

Don't forget to dump composer autoload

```bash
composer dump-autoload
```

**And you are ready to go.**

#### Soft Deleting

The default migration takes advantage of `onDelete('cascade')` clauses within the pivot tables to remove relations when a parent record is deleted. If for some reason you cannot use cascading deletes in your database, the EntrustRole and EntrustPermission classes, and the HasRole trait include event listeners to manually delete records in relevant pivot tables. In the interest of not accidentally deleting data, the event listeners will **not** delete pivot data if the model uses soft deleting. However, due to limitations in Laravel's event listeners, there is no way to distinguish between a call to `delete()` versus a call to `forceDelete()`. For this reason, **before you force delete a model, you must manually delete any of the relationship data** (unless your pivot tables uses cascading deletes). For example:

```php
$role = Role::findOrFail(1); // Pull back a given role

// Regular Delete
$role->delete(); // This will work no matter what

// Force Delete
$role->users()->sync([]); // Delete relationship data
$role->perms()->sync([]); // Delete relationship data

$role->forceDelete(); // Now force delete will work regardless of whether the pivot table has cascading delete
```

## Usage

### Concepts
Let's start by creating the following `Role`s and `Permission`s:

```php
$owner = new Role();
$owner->name         = 'owner';
$owner->display_name = 'Project Owner'; // optional
$owner->description  = 'User is the owner of a given project'; // optional
$owner->save();

$admin = new Role();
$admin->name         = 'admin';
$admin->display_name = 'User Administrator'; // optional
$admin->description  = 'User is allowed to manage and edit other users'; // optional
$admin->save();
```

Next, with both roles created let's assign them to the users.
Thanks to the `HasRole` trait this is as easy as:

```php
$user = User::where('username', '=', 'michele')->first();

// role attach alias
$user->attachRole($admin); // parameter can be an Role object, array, or id

// or eloquent's original technique
$user->roles()->attach($admin->id); // id only
```

Now we just need to add permissions to those Roles:

```php
$createPost = new Permission();
$createPost->name         = 'create-post';
$createPost->display_name = 'Create Posts'; // optional
// Allow a user to...
$createPost->description  = 'create new blog posts'; // optional
$createPost->save();

$editUser = new Permission();
$editUser->name         = 'edit-user';
$editUser->display_name = 'Edit Users'; // optional
// Allow a user to...
$editUser->description  = 'edit existing users'; // optional
$editUser->save();

$admin->attachPermission($createPost);
// equivalent to $admin->perms()->sync(array($createPost->id));

$owner->attachPermissions(array($createPost, $editUser));
// equivalent to $owner->perms()->sync(array($createPost->id, $editUser->id));
```

#### Checking for Roles & Permissions

Now we can check for roles and permissions simply by doing:

```php
$user->hasRole('owner');   // false
$user->hasRole('admin');   // true
$user->can('edit-user');   // false
$user->can('create-post'); // true
```

Both `hasRole()` and `can()` can receive an array of roles & permissions to check:

```php
$user->hasRole(['owner', 'admin']);       // true
$user->can(['edit-user', 'create-post']); // true
```

By default, if any of the roles or permissions are present for a user then the method will return true.
Passing `true` as a second parameter instructs the method to require **all** of the items:

```php
$user->hasRole(['owner', 'admin']);             // true
$user->hasRole(['owner', 'admin'], true);       // false, user does not have admin role
$user->can(['edit-user', 'create-post']);       // true
$user->can(['edit-user', 'create-post'], true); // false, user does not have edit-user permission
```

You can have as many `Role`s as you want for each `User` and vice versa.

The `Entrust` class has shortcuts to both `can()` and `hasRole()` for the currently logged in user:

```php
Entrust::hasRole('role-name');
Entrust::can('permission-name');

// is identical to

Auth::user()->hasRole('role-name');
Auth::user()->can('permission-name);
```

You can also use placeholders (wildcards) to check any matching permission by doing:

```php
// match any admin permission
$user->can("admin.*"); // true

// match any permission about users
$user->can("*_users"); // true
```


#### User ability

More advanced checking can be done using the awesome `ability` function.
It takes in three parameters (roles, permissions, options):
- `roles` is a set of roles to check.
- `permissions` is a set of permissions to check.

Either of the roles or permissions variable can be a comma separated string or array:

```php
$user->ability(array('admin', 'owner'), array('create-post', 'edit-user'));

// or

$user->ability('admin,owner', 'create-post,edit-user');
```

This will check whether the user has any of the provided roles and permissions.
In this case it will return true since the user is an `admin` and has the `create-post` permission.

The third parameter is an options array:

```php
$options = array(
    'validate_all' => true | false (Default: false),
    'return_type'  => boolean | array | both (Default: boolean)
);
```

- `validate_all` is a boolean flag to set whether to check all the values for true, or to return true if at least one role or permission is matched.
- `return_type` specifies whether to return a boolean, array of checked values, or both in an array.

Here is an example output:

```php
$options = array(
    'validate_all' => true,
    'return_type' => 'both'
);

list($validate, $allValidations) = $user->ability(
    array('admin', 'owner'),
    array('create-post', 'edit-user'),
    $options
);

var_dump($validate);
// bool(false)

var_dump($allValidations);
// array(4) {
//     ['role'] => bool(true)
//     ['role_2'] => bool(false)
//     ['create-post'] => bool(true)
//     ['edit-user'] => bool(false)
// }

```
The `Entrust` class has a shortcut to `ability()` for the currently logged in user:

```php
Entrust::ability('admin,owner', 'create-post,edit-user');

// is identical to

Auth::user()->ability('admin,owner', 'create-post,edit-user');
```

### Middleware

You can use a middleware to filter routes and route groups by permission or role
```php
Route::group(['prefix' => 'admin', 'middleware' => ['role:admin']], function() {
    Route::get('/', 'AdminController@welcome');
    Route::get('/manage', ['middleware' => ['permission:manage-admins'], 'uses' => 'AdminController@manageAdmins']);
});
```

It is possible to use pipe symbol as *OR* operator:
```php
'middleware' => ['role:admin|root']
```

To emulate *AND* functionality just use multiple instances of middleware
```php
'middleware' => ['permission:owner', 'permission:writer']
```

For more complex situations use `ability` middleware which accepts 3 parameters: roles, permissions, validate_all
```php
'middleware' => ['ability:admin|owner,create-post|edit-user,true']
```

### Short syntax route filter

To filter a route by permission or role you can call the following in your `app/Http/routes.php`:

```php
// only users with roles that have the 'manage_posts' permission will be able to access any route within admin/post
Entrust::routeNeedsPermission('admin/post*', 'create-post');

// only owners will have access to routes within admin/advanced
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', 'owner');

// optionally the second parameter can be an array of permissions or roles
// user would need to match all roles or permissions for that route
Entrust::routeNeedsPermission('admin/post*', array('create-post', 'edit-comment'));
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', array('owner','writer'));
```

Both of these methods accept a third parameter.
If the third parameter is null then the return of a prohibited access will be `App::abort(403)`, otherwise the third parameter will be returned.
So you can use it like:

```php
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', 'owner', Redirect::to('/home'));
```

Furthermore both of these methods accept a fourth parameter.
It defaults to true and checks all roles/permissions given.
If you set it to false, the function will only fail if all roles/permissions fail for that user.
Useful for admin applications where you want to allow access for multiple groups.

```php
// if a user has 'create-post', 'edit-comment', or both they will have access
Entrust::routeNeedsPermission('admin/post*', array('create-post', 'edit-comment'), null, false);

// if a user is a member of 'owner', 'writer', or both they will have access
Entrust::routeNeedsRole('admin/advanced*', array('owner','writer'), null, false);

// if a user is a member of 'owner', 'writer', or both, or user has 'create-post', 'edit-comment' they will have access
// if the 4th parameter is true then the user must be a member of Role and must have Permission
Entrust::routeNeedsRoleOrPermission(
    'admin/advanced*',
    array('owner', 'writer'),
    array('create-post', 'edit-comment'),
    null,
    false
);
```

### Route filter

Entrust roles/permissions can be used in filters by simply using the `can` and `hasRole` methods from within the Facade:

```php
Route::filter('manage_posts', function()
{
    // check the current user
    if (!Entrust::can('create-post')) {
        return Redirect::to('admin');
    }
});

// only users with roles that have the 'manage_posts' permission will be able to access any admin/post route
Route::when('admin/post*', 'manage_posts');
```

Using a filter to check for a role:

```php
Route::filter('owner_role', function()
{
    // check the current user
    if (!Entrust::hasRole('Owner')) {
        App::abort(403);
    }
});

// only owners will have access to routes within admin/advanced
Route::when('admin/advanced*', 'owner_role');
```

As you can see `Entrust::hasRole()` and `Entrust::can()` checks if the user is logged in, and then if he or she has the role or permission.
If the user is not logged the return will also be `false`.

## Troubleshooting

If you encounter an error when doing the migration that looks like:

```
SQLSTATE[HY000]: General error: 1005 Can't create table 'laravelbootstrapstarter.#sql-42c_f8' (errno: 150)
    (SQL: alter table `role_user` add constraint role_user_user_id_foreign foreign key (`user_id`)
    references `users` (`id`)) (Bindings: array ())
```

Then it's likely that the `id` column in your user table does not match the `user_id` column in `role_user`.
Make sure both are `INT(10)`.

When trying to use the EntrustUserTrait methods, you encounter the error which looks like

    Class name must be a valid object or a string

then probably you don't have published Entrust assets or something went wrong when you did it.
First of all check that you have the `entrust.php` file in your `app/config` directory.
If you don't, then try `php artisan vendor:publish` and, if it does not appear, manually copy the `/vendor/zizaco/entrust/src/config/config.php` file in your config directory and rename it `entrust.php`.

## License

Entrust is free software distributed under the terms of the MIT license.

## Contribution guidelines

Support follows PSR-1 and PSR-4 PHP coding standards, and semantic versioning.

Please report any issue you find in the issues page.  
Pull requests are welcome.
